So, in Mathematics, you would have approached
a lot of problems algebraically. When you
enter higher classes, the teachers would have
said, “There is a geometric solution to
this, which is a lot more elegant!” Multiple
pathways, leading to the same answer… Don’t
we have it in religion too? We think that
there is but One God.. One Religion. But,
when we encounter other religions, and the
beauties that exist in them, that is where
we realise the Hows can be many! This is what
we are going to talk a bit more about. They
call it “Elegant Solutions”. Beautiful.
Beautiful in its Simplicity. Unexpected Simplicity,
and Elegance. That’s what we are going to
see! Let’s look at a couple of examples!
Namaste! Elegantly Simple! Should be beautiful.
Should be simple. Should be elegant. There
are many examples, in nature, in the work
of mankind, smart, clever, things. We are
going to review a few.
Pythagoras Theorem — I am sure every one
of you remember this one! Two sides. They
could be of any length. But, A Squared added
to B Squared will always be equal to C Squared.
Said Pythagoras, 2500 years ago! Till date,
there have been more than 350 different kinds
of proofs for this popular theorem. Among
these unique and different approaches, there
is one that I think is most elegant. This
one comes from Mr. Pythagoras himself! Extremely
simple. Just using four pictures. No higher-level
maths! Look at this unfold!
So, A Squared added to B Squared.. Is it always
equal to C Squared? For arbitrary values for
A and B? That’s what we are going to see.
Take any random triangle, with random side
lengths a, b, and c. (Oh, wait. Not any random
c. But a particular c, that makes it a right
triangle). Repeat it and make a set of four
exactly look-alike triangles. Now, move those
four around to rearrange and form a square
like this. As you set this up, you will notice
an inner-tilted-square forming, with side
length c. So, the area of the inner-square
would be c squared. Everything is clear till
now!
Now, remember the colors of these triangles..
Use the same triangles. But, let us take them
on a further excursion. And, reconstitute
them in the form of TWO RECTANGLES. I am not
changing anything else! If you notice carefully,
we now have two rectangles with side lengths
a and b.
Okay! Now comes the clincher! As you can see
on the left, the empty space inside the four
triangles is c squared. And on the right,
the empty space has now become two spaces
and its areas are respectively b squared and
a squared (as the empty spaces are squares
of side lengths a and b respectively!)
From this, we realise that irrespective of
whatever a or b values you begin with, c squared
will always be equal to a squared plus b squared.
Proved! Q E D! Whatever was to be proved,
has been proved! Pythagoras himself has given
this proof.
In Nature too, we can see such elegance presenting
itself often! So, assume there are four cities
arranged in a square form like this. And,
the Municipality wants to connect these places
up for travel. Or, so goes the story. And,
they invite suggestions.. on how to lay the
roads. People come up with suggestions. One
of them comes up with … a criss-cross pattern.
(Length 4 + 2√2)
But, .. the authorities complain that there
are multiple paths between the same cities,
and they are trying to minimise road-length
so as to keep costs low. Another proposes
a grand circle. From wherever to wherever,
a circular path. Outer Ring Road! (Length
π√2).
But the authorities feel it can be shortened
further.
A straight line approach? (Length 4).
Or even a shorter-straight-line approach (Length
3).
This is good, but to go from A to B, is a
circuitous hell through D and C… Is there
a better way?
Another person came up with an X. (Length
2√2)
Is there a better way? Yes.. Another person
came up with an I pattern. But, the road length
is still 3..
Is there a superminimum? There is a field
of mathematics called Calculus of Variations.
A complex mathematical concept — and after
deep analysis, one can prove that THIS IS
the minimal distance possible. You may not
believe the final answer when I show it to
you.. You may not even be convinced that this
is the shortest! But, take a look! This is
the minimal distance structure. The angles
at the center are exactly 120 degrees. There
are two convergence points. And these convergence
points are called Steiner points. But, how
do we even arrive at something like this??
We need a mathematician for this. For each
city. For each highway department! Perhaps,
only then! Or, .. do you have soap in your
bathroom? See what this guy does! He is a
mathematician. Look how he demonstrates the
answer for that roadways problem.
How?! How did soap know? Did it hurriedly
get a Ph.D in Higher Maths just before dissolving
in the water? How does Nature know, to minimise
it? When we need a maths Ph.D to derive those!?
But, at least these, you can say it is soap,
man-made solutions, etc, but here is an even
more interesting demonstration of elegance
for you!
Here, we have a river flowing — top of screen
to bottom of screen. And, near the river,
there are two little towns. One a little farther
from the river, and the other a little closer.
They want to set up a water distribution station
somewhere in the bank of the river, so that
these straight pipelines can serve water to
these two towns, while keeping pipe-laying
cost to a minimum. They think about it! Should
they do it like.. This…
Or, should they do it like That…
Where should they keep the station so that
the pipe-length total is a minimum.
Or, should they try this configuration…
You know what the answer is? The elegant,
simple answer? Start by imagining a mirror-image
of the closer-town on to the other side of
the river. Lay a straight-pipe-line imaginarily
from one town to the other, passing through
the river. Look for the point where this imaginary
pipeline crosses the river! THAT is your optimum
point for locating the water distribution
station. Start laying the pipeline from that
point towards both towns! Hey! Light beam?
Angle of incidence? Angle of reflection? Hey!
How does light know to minimise pipe length?!
Isn’t that simply amazing?!
VanMoof is a Dutch cycling company. VanMoof
exported its cycles to America too. Their
cycles were world-class, after all! But, the
problem was, it started getting delivered
with breakages. They tried larger boxes, better
packaging, they even wondered if they should
switch delivery agencies… They tried literally
everything under the sun! But, nothing seemed
to work. Great cycles, but when delivered
from Europe to the Americas, the customers
were unhappy and the company didn’t know
what to do. They brainstormed for ideas..
And, one of them quipped, “If only this
were a smart-TV, do you know how carefully
they would be handled?!” They pounced on
that single thought, and said in unison, “That
is what we are going to do!” From that day
onwards, VanMoof cycles started being delivered
in a box like this! It features a very large
television inside which there is a cycle!
So, the delivery agents looked at the “Fragile
/ Careful” notice, saw the image of the
TV, and immediately, subconsciously, became
a lot more caring and attentive.. They started
delivering the cycle with as much respect
as they used to deliver a Smart TV. VanMoof
even included the word “Smart” on the
packaging! Ride the Future! Smart! Electrified!
How clever! Zero extra cost almost. For nothing
changed in the design or the composition of
the box!
And, finally, we can’t be talking about
elegant, simple, out of the box, without referring
to Steve Jobs! This was the first iPod. It
wouldn’t even have fit into a pocket! And,
very heavy too! When Steve Jobs was shown
this first prototype, he was livid! “No
way, make it smaller!” was his response.
The engineers responded with, “Sorry, we
can’t go back to the drawing board. It is
nearly impossible. Everything has to be redesigned.
I don’t think it can be made any smaller”..
While the engineers were walking with him
in the corridor, Steve Jobs paused, turned
back, went near an aquarium, and dropped the
prototype into the water! Plop!
It settled in the bottom, and a moment later,
there was a gurgling bubble rising to the
top. “That’s it”, Steve said, “there’s
space there. If bubbles are coming out, there
must be empty space inside. So, make it smaller!”
And, only because of this relentless pressure
that Steve applied on his team, advice, tension,
emergency, panic, pressure, … a couple of
months later, Steve was able to do this. Ten
thousand songs in your pocket! He was able
to launch that magical device!
As a closing thought, we have been discussing
elegant simplicity. We have read before — Simplicity
is the Ultimate Sophistication. Albert Einstein
himself (or at least some people say he did!)
has said once:- “When the solution is simple,
God is answering!” God herself is talking.
It is not you. Not me. Man can’t do it by
himself. There is something divine involved.
Something far beyond human comprehension.
What humility! Alright, we will meet next
week! Thank you!